English Pronunciation Evaluation without Complex Joint
Training: LoRA Fine-tuned Speech Multimodal LLM
Taekyung Ahn1,2, Hosung Nam2
Enuma, Inc.1, Korea University2
taekyung@enuma.com ,hnam@korea.ac.kr
Abstract
This study demonstrates that a Multimodal Large Language Model
(MLLM) adapted via Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) can perform
both Automatic Pronunciation Assessment (APA) and Mispronun-
ciation Detection and Diagnosis (MDD) simultaneously. Leverag-
ing Microsoft’s Phi-4-multimodal-instruct, our fine-tuning method
eliminates the need for complex architectural changes or separate
training procedures conventionally required for these distinct tasks.
Fine-tuned on the Speechocean762 dataset, the pronunciation eval-
uation scores predicted by the model exhibited a strong Pearson
Correlation Coefficient (PCC > 0.7) with human-assigned scores,
while achieving low Word Error Rate (WER) and Phoneme Error
Rate (PER) (both < 0.15). Notably, fine-tuning only the LoRA layers
was sufficient to achieve performance levels comparable to those
achieved by fine-tuning all audio layers. This research highlights
that an integrated pronunciation assessment system can be estab-
lished by adapting large multimodal models without full fine-tuning,
utilizing a significantly simpler training methodology compared to
previous joint models designed for simultaneous APA and MDD.
This efficient LoRA-based approach paves the way for more acces-
sible, integrated, and effective Computer-Assisted Pronunciation
Training (CAPT) technologies for English L2 learners.
Keywords
ASR, LLM, APA, MDD, Multimodal, EFL, CAPT
1 Introduction
With the advancement of ASR (Automatic Speech Recognition)
technology, various technologies have been developed in the CAPT
(Computer-assisted pronunciation training) field to help non-native
English speakers with English pronunciation [ 8]. CAPT is a system
that automatically evaluates pronunciation in speech. It can be pri-
marily divided into the APA (Automatic Pronunciation Assessment)
task, which evaluates given utterances with scores, and the MDD
(Mispronunciation Detection and Diagnosis) task, which detects
whether there were mispronunciations when a speaker reads a
given sentence.
The emergence of end-to-end pre-trained speech recognition
models has enabled superior performance through fine-tuning with
minimal data and streamlined training processes [ 3] [2] [5]. CAPT
systems leveraging these models have advanced in two primary
directions: enhancing mispronounced speech recognition through
fine-tuning techniques, and developing robust pronunciation eval-
uation frameworks based on recognition outcomes [ 18] [24] [12].
The inherent flexibility of these models has facilitated research on
unified systems that simultaneously perform APA and MDD tasks
"The city was ..."
"Rate the pronunciation of the audio…"
Multimodal Large Language Model(Phi-4-multimodal instruct)❄
 Large Language Model(Phi-4-mini)❄
 Audio Encoder🔥
 LoRA (Adapter)❄
 Audio projector❄
 Tokenizer
{ "accuracy": 4.0, "prosodic": 3.5, "word transcript": "The city was ...","phoneme transcript": "DH AX..."}Figure 1: The overview of our proposed method.
[20], revealing a significant correlation between these two function-
alities. However, these approaches still require separate datasets
and independent model architectures for each task, necessitating
distinct training procedures and computational resources despite
their functional interdependence.
Recently, LLMs (Large Language Models) have exhibited signif-
icant advancements in understanding the context of natural lan-
guage [ 14]. LLMs can perform the required purpose through a small
amount of additional training or even aligning using only prompts,
without gathering massive training data and computing resources.
Following these advancements, multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) com-
bined with vision and audio encoders have emerged. They employ
an architecture that connects encoders to existing LLMs, enabling
the conversion of raw images or audio files into vector representa-
tions similar to text embeddings. By training adapters to understand
this vector, LLMs can understand image or audio inputs in the same
context as text.
To address the limitations of existing separate training approaches,
our research introduces a unified method that executes both APA
and MDD tasks within a single training framework and model ar-
chitecture. We specifically employ Phi-4-multimodal-instruct [ 1],arXiv:2509.02915v1  [cs.CL]  3 Sep 2025Ahn et al.
leveraging its MLLM capabilities to overcome the traditional re-
quirement for independent datasets and model layers. By utilizing
efficient LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) fine-tuning that learns only a
speech adapter, our approach bypasses the computational demands
of full fine-tuning while maintaining performance. Our objective is
to demonstrate that this unified MLLM framework can effectively
handle both pronunciation evaluation tasks simultaneously, provid-
ing a more resource-efficient and streamlined alternative to existing
multi-stage CAPT systems.
2 Related Works
2.1 CAPT system with ASR
CAPT (Computer-assisted pronunciation training), emerged in the
1980s [ 8]. In CAPT, pronunciation education has been actively used
and researched by incorporating ASR (automatic speech recogni-
tion) technology. Pronunciation evaluation methodology has been
researched since the 1990s [ 15] [4] [10], and this area can be largely
divided into Automatic Pronunciation Assessment (APA) and Mis-
pronunciation Detection and Diagnosis (MDD) tasks.
APA refers to a series of methodologies that help language learn-
ing by building a system that automatically scores learners’ ut-
terances. With ASR technology, it was possible to build a system
that could recognize phoneme units of speech and automatically
score pronunciation accuracy by comparing them with the correct
phonemes [ 9] [10]. This research has been conducted in various
ways regarding evaluation methods that can measure pronuncia-
tion accuracy with a metric called goodness of pronunciation (GOP)
using HMM-based ASR systems [15] [23].
MDD research proceeded by comparing extracted phoneme-
level acoustic features with correct phonemes. Traditional mis-
pronunciation detection and diagnosis technologies typically rely
on expert-crafted phonological rules, statistical methods such as
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMMs), and acoustic feature analysis including MFCCs and for-
mant tracking, which require extensive manual engineering and
often struggle with context-dependent variations, prosodic features,
and speaker variability [23] [6] [19].
2.2 End-to-end ASR modeling
[3.5, 4.0]Traditional Joint Model "DH AX … "Audio-language model { "accuracy": 4.0,          "prosodic": 3.5, "phoneme transcript": "DH AX..."}
prompt"The city was ..."Audio model APA head MDD head 
Joint Model with MLLM 
"The city was ..."
Figure 2: The Comparison of our model and past studies.
With advances in machine learning technology, speech recog-
nition models can now be trained without complex preprocessingprocedures as deep learning models can autonomously learn the re-
lationship between speech and text [ 7]. Gong [ 13] proposed GOPT, a
Transformer model based on GOP features for assessing non-native
English speakers’ pronunciation. This model simultaneously evalu-
ates multiple aspects of pronunciation quality (accuracy, fluency,
completeness, prosody) across different features (phoneme, word,
utterance) through multi-task learning, improving performance
for each assessment task. Experiments on the Speechocean762 [ 25]
dataset demonstrated that GOPT significantly outperforms previous
traditional methods in pronunciation assessment.
With the emergence of SSL (self-supervised learning) methods
such as wav2vec2.0 [ 3], ASR models can learn speech features as
units smaller than phonemes. Researchers could easily build APA
and MDD engines by fine-tuning with a small amount of data [ 18]
[24] [12]. Despite these advances, most approaches still require
separate training procedures for APA and MDD tasks. [ 20] built a
joint model that could perform both APA and MDD together by
fine-tuning the wav2vec2.0 model with speech data transcribed
at the phoneme level, then performing multi-task learning with
separated APA and MDD heads. However, this approach still ne-
cessitated separate datasets and distinct training processes for each
task encoder, limiting scalability and resource efficiency. Addition-
ally, being trained solely on speech input, these models cannot
incorporate other modalities such as text prompts for enhanced
flexibility.
2.3 Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM)
Subsequently, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) emerged
with the ability to process images and speech alongside text. These
models convert visual or audio inputs into vector dimensions through
specialized encoders, then align these vector representations with
LLM embeddings to enable comprehensive multimodal understand-
ing. Wang [ 21] investigated the zero-shot capabilities of the GPT-4o
[16] for pronunciation assessment, evaluating its performance on
multi-level (phoneme, word, sentence) scoring. The study shows
GPT-4o’s zero-shot scoring accuracy was found to be significantly
lower than other evaluation methods. This study concludes that
MLLMs like GPT-4o may not yet replace specialized tools for scor-
ing pronunciation without fine-tuning.
Fu [11] developed a pronunciation evaluation system based on
MLLMs. In their research, they trained a dedicated audio encoder
and integrated it with an LLM, achieving high Pearson Correla-
tion Coefficient (PCC) values between the system’s predicted pro-
nunciation scores and human evaluators. This study successfully
demonstrated the viability of MLLM-based pronunciation assess-
ment systems. However, this study used approximately 1,000 hours
of speech data to train the audio encoder for integration with the
LLM. Connecting pre-trained audio encoders and LLMs through
adapters to create MLLMs presented significant challenges. This
approach involved complex integration processes resulting in sub-
stantial costs for training and deployment.
2.4 Phi-4-multimodal with LoRA fine-tuning
Phi-4-multimodal [ 1] is a visual-speech language model released by
Microsoft, a multimodal model that connects visual and speech en-
coders to LLM. Phi-4 incorporates a Mixture-of-LoRAs (Low-RankEnglish Pronunciation Evaluation without Complex Joint Training: LoRA Fine-tuned Speech Multimodal LLM
Phi-4 Multimodal Model 
<|user|><|APA|><|audio_1|>Rate the pronunciation of the audio…<|end|><|assistant|><|user|><|MDD|><|audio_1|>Transcribe the audio utterance…<|end|><|assistant|>DATA Input Template with Control Tokens Inference Results { "word transcript": "The city...","phoneme transcript": "DH AX..."}{ "accuracy": 8, "prosodic": 9,"fluency": 8, "total": 8}
Figure 3: The methods for using the prompts and control tokens.
Adaptations) structure in the network, designing the architecture to
achieve good performance while minimizing interference between
modalities by training only LoRA layers, not full fine-tuning. With
this advantage, various fine-tuning can be conducted with limited
computational resources compared to the model size.
Leveraging these capabilities of Phi-4-multimodal, our research
addresses the fundamental limitations of existing CAPT systems
that require separate training procedures and datasets for APA
and MDD tasks. By utilizing the unified MLLM framework with
efficient LoRA fine-tuning, we demonstrate that both tasks can
be accomplished simultaneously within a single model architec-
ture and training process. This approach not only eliminates the
resource-intensive requirements of previous methods but also en-
ables flexible system customization through prompt engineering,
representing a significant advancement toward more accessible and
efficient CAPT technologies. Our work establishes the feasibility
of building a truly unified pronunciation assessment system that
overcomes the computational and architectural constraints that
have historically separated these functionally related tasks.
3 Method
3.1 Control Tokens
To differentiate between tasks without modifying the model archi-
tecture, we employed control tokens: <|APA|>for APA prompts
and<|MDD|>for MDD prompts (see Figure 3). These tokens were
prepended to each prompt before Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT).
During the SFT process, the model learned to associate each con-
trol token with the specific requirements of the corresponding
task. We then experimentally evaluated the performance benefits
during inference when explicitly guiding the model using these
task-specific control tokens. For baseline comparison, we used the
Phi-4-multimodal-instruct model [ 1] for inference without control
tokens or additional training.
3.2 Encoder Layer Unfreeze
This study investigated the effect of unfreezing specific audio-
related layers. Using the same dataset, we compared two distinct
fine-tuning strategies:
1. LoRA-only fine-tuning: Updating only the weights of the LoRA
adapter layers, while keeping other layers, including the Audio
Encoder and Audio Projector, frozen (See Figure 1).
2. Unfreeze fine-tuning: Updating the weights of the LoRA adapter
layers in addition to unfreezing and updating the weights of the
Audio Encoder and Audio Projector layers (See Figure 4).
{ "accuracy": 4.0, "prosodic": 3.5, "word transcript": "The city was ...","phoneme transcript": "DH AX..."}Multimodal Large Language Model(Phi-4-multimodal instruct)❄
 Large Language Model(Phi-4-mini)🔥
 Audio Encoder🔥
 LoRA (Adapter)🔥
 Audio projector❄
 Tokenizer
Prompt Wav file Figure 4: The method of unfreezing layers.
While conventional practice typically limits fine-tuning to LoRA
adapter layers, the official documentation [ 17] suggests potential
benefits from unfreezing all audio layers. For this reason, our exper-
iment directly compares these approaches to determine whether
unfreezing the Audio Encoder and Projector alongside the LoRA
adapter provides performance advantages for audio-related tasks.
3.3 Find the Correlation between APA and MDD
tasks
Based on Ryu et al.’s study [ 20], we analyzed the correlation be-
tween pronunciation accuracy scores and pronunciation recogni-
tion performance. We examined whether scores from the single
model (jointly trained on both APA and MDD tasks using identical
utterance datasets) genuinely reflect pronunciation quality rather
than merely projecting data to scores. Specifically, we investigated
the relationship between human and model’s accuracy scores and
Phoneme Error Rate (PER) from the MDD task. We hypothesized